How were text and commentary organized and laid out?
Examples from the Venetus A manuscript

When composing this manuscript, and perhaps its precursors, a scribe would have been presented with the text of the Iliad and the annotations in the form of scholia. In order to understand exactly how these data are used, understanding their arrangement and placement is essential. The manuscript allows a finite amount of space, so the way in which it is used may be illustrative of the scribes general practices and specific decisions.  

The analysis of spatial relationship between the scholia and the epic text has been approached in earlier studies, notably in “Words within Words” by Marilena Maniaci. Within her work, Dr. Maniaci has addressed the question of how a scribe would construct a densely annotated folio page. When there was a great deal of scholarly information for a page, challenges concerning fitting it all would arise. Following from her work, one finds that there is a certain pattern by which the scribe organizes the scholia in relation to the folio page and the body text. Dr. Maniaci’s work has focused largely upon how space is used and managed on a folio dense with scholia. By examining folio pages less heavily annotated, one can see that the “hidden rules” discussed in the above article can be adjusted slightly and then hold rather firmly, with notable exceptions, even in places where the availability of space is not an issue. This examination of Book seven of the Venetus A tries to determine what the scribe does and how the scribe places the scholia when there is the freedom to place them where he would please. 

A brief discussion of the manuscript, scholia, and related terms will establish a basis for this paper. The Venetus A is a 10th century Byzantine manuscript, now held in the Marciana Library in Venice. The scholia, in this manuscript, are linked to their respective lines by “lemmata.” A "lemma" is a quoted phrase from the passage on which the scholion comments. There are several types of scholia, as seen on [99 recto][1]: interior, exterior, intermarginal, interlinear, and main, but this discussion will focus on the main scholia, that is, those which make three-quarters of square around the text body. These are the largest in size and most numerous. 

The general arrangement of scholia in relation to the text body seems to follow a regular pattern, which becomes apparent if the text is divided into thirds of sorts. The first six, or so, lines of Iliadic text are commented upon in the top border region of page. The middle twelve, or so, lines are commented upon in the middle border. The final six lines, or so, of text are commented upon in the bottom border region.  In this middle region, the first scholion usually is adjacent to the line on which it comments, and then the subsequent scholia will follow in order, up to approximately line eighteen. At that point, the subsequent scholion will begin beneath the text. These seem to be the conditioned practice of the scribe. On folio page [95 recto][2], there are only two main scholia: one for line 2, the other for line 21, and with the exception of two intermarginal scholia in the middle of the page, there is no other writing on that side. With this sparseness of scholia and the distance between the two referent lines, the scribe could have placed the scholia adjacent to their respective lines. That the scribe did not do this seems to suggest that this separation by thirds is the standard practice. In cases such as this, when space is not an issue, conceivably, it would be as convenient to place the scholia at exactly the line to which they refer. By maintaining this thirds-structured layout, the scribe demonstrates a sort of protocol for situating the scholia in relation to the text. This decision was made possibly because, in the earlier, more heavily annotated folios, the readers and the scribe would have become accustomed to looking to the top for the earlier lines, then the mid-section, and, finally, the bottom for the final notes. "Scribe," in this case, may refer to the proto-scribe, who wrote the first text in this manner, or to any scribe up to the immediate copyist of the Venetus A.

When the scribe breaks these guidelines, it often seems possible to infer reasons. What seems to be the clearest of these exceptions takes place largely in the middle region. Although scholia of the mid-region usually begin adjacent to the first referent line, when the scholia would exceed the space available if this were followed, the scribe seems to move scholia up an appropriate number of lines to fit all of the scholia as close to the referent lines as possible. This is illustrated on 100 recto: the first scholion begins four lines above the line to which it refers, and then, the rest continue, more or less within the general pattern. The scholia have been moved up just enough: they are kept within their “bounds” and still as close to their text as possible. The scholia referring to line 18 begins the scholia in the bottom region. On [97 recto][4], all of the scholia for that page, for lines 2, 4, 5, and 7, are in the top region. This is beyond his usual limit of the fifth or sixth line. It seems that this is done because the seventh is still relatively near to the top and because it would have been the only scholion in the middle. This, along with other examples, seems to demonstrate that the scribe is working to provide readability for the reader; that is to say, it seems the scribe tries, as much as possible, to make the progression of scholia obvious, accessible, and continual. 

On [93 verso][5], the first five scholia, referring to the second through fifth lines, are in the upper region. The next seven scholia, referring to the eighth through twenty-first lines, are in the middle side region. The final scholion, referring to the twenty-fourth line, is in the bottom region. The scholia in the middle region are of particular interest because the scholion referring to the eighth line is placed adjacent to the first line of text. The final scholion of the mid-region, which refers to the twenty-first line, begins adjacent to the twenty-second line. This is perhaps illustrative of the scribe’s consciousness of space. This final mid-scholion ends with three lines of text remaining, which would provide ample space for the final scholion, but it is placed it in the bottom region. Because the scholion for the eighth line is moved up, the mid-region scholia are contained within their formal bounds. The final scholion is, then, able to be written in its respective place.      

By making this process digital, one would gain speed: rather than linking the words by sight, a search for matching texts could be done. This would also give an average of how many lines the text is moved up in order to fit the scholia, and, in a closely related number, one could determine how many lines separate the scholia from their referent especially in the middle section. Over the span of the entire manuscript, one would be able to see if this pattern breaks down, and if so, under what conditions. 

